\chapter{Max-marginal computation}\label{sec:mm-inference}

The algorithm to compute max-marginals $\mmi$ for all nodes $i \in \cV$ and all 
possibilities $y_i \in \cY_i$ is shown in \algref{mm-inference}.  The algorithm 
works by passing forward messages $\fwdmsg_i$ in the first for-loop and 
backward messages $\bwdmsg_i$ in the second for-loop.  The backward (similarly 
forward) messages consist of the invariant ``best possible score achieved 
considering only nodes topologically downstream (similarly upstream) plus the
the current node''.  The summation of the best possible downstream scores and 
best possible upstream scores yields the best possible score attainable for 
each possibility at the current node: $m^\star_i = \bwdmsg_i + \fwdmsg_i - 
\phi_i$, where we subtract $\phi_i$ to prevent overcounting it.  The quantity 
$m^\star_i$ is a vector of max-marginal scores for all possibilities $y_i$ in 
node $i$.  In the last step, we simply make explicit how $m^\star_i$ satisfies 
our definition of max-marginal by indexing the vector of scores via the 
$[\cdot]$ vector element indexing operator.

The best scoring sequence $y^\star = \argmax_{y \in \cY} s(x,y)$ and the 
corresponding score $s(x,y^\star)$ can be obtained via the max-marginals:  It 
must be the case that $m_i^\star[y^\star_i]$ is the largest value in 
$m_i^\star$, otherwise $y^\star$ would not be the highest scoring 
sequence---the highest scoring sequence would use the alternate $(\argmax 
m_i^\star) \neq y_i^\star$ for node $i$.

One can also obtain witness statistics of the form $\#[\witnessi]$ denoting the 
number of times $y_i$ is used as a participant (a witness) in all max-marginal 
sequences in the network.  It is always used at least once, for its own 
max-marginal sequence, but may be used in other sequences in which it is 
unconstrained but still chosen.  These witness statistics can be computed in 
the same way that messages $\fwdmsg_i$ and $\bwdmsg_i$ are propagated, but now 
by accumulating histograms of argmax indices forward and backward through the 
graph.


For a real implementation in MATLAB, please refer to \\
\footnotesize{
\url{https://github.com/bensapp/Stretchable-Models-for-Motion-Parsing/blob/master/cps/ps_model_max_inference_2clique_sparse_edges.m}
}
\input{mm-inference-alg}
